The small claims COVID-19 rental debt process
The small claims COVID-19 rental debt process
The small claims process is an easier way to take a tenant to court if they owe you COVID-19 rental debt
COVID-19 rental debt is rent due between March 1, 2020 and September 30, 2021
If you're suing about COVID-19 rental debt there is no limit to how much you can sue for in small claims court
Select any step to get instructions
 Ask tenant to pay you
Ask your tenant for the unpaid money. Help your tenant obtain rental assistance.
 Start a small claims case if they don't pay
File papers to start the case, get a court date, and officially let your tenant know you're suing them.
 Go to your court date
The judge listens to both sides, looks at evidence, and decides who wins or loses the case.
 After the trial – pay and collect
The side that was sued, lost and owes money may appeal (ask for a new trial). After an appeal is done or the time to file has run out, whoever won can collect their money.
Already know what you are looking for?
Index: All Pages
What do these papers mean?
Plaintiff’s Claim and ORDER to Go to Small Claims Court (COVID-19 Rental Debt)(form SC-500)
If you received a Plaintiff’s Claim and ORDER to Go to Small Claims Court (COVID-19 Rental Debt) (form SC-500), your landlord is suing you for COVID-19 rental debt in small claims court. The court set a date to hear from you and your landlord (a trial) before it makes a decision.
Enter your email
We&#39;ll only use this email to send this link
What this form tells you
Trial date and time
The date, time, and location are on the first page.
What if I can't  go to court this day?
If you can't go to court on the day and time listed, you can ask the court to change the court date. Fill out and file Request to Postpone Trial (form SC-150). There's a $10.00 fee to change the court date.
Who's suing you
Your landlord's name is listed on page 2. If your landlord is a business, then an employee, like the property manager, may be the person who shows up in court.
How much money is your landlord asking for?
Item 3 lists the amount of COVID-19 rental debt your landlord is suing you for. Item 4 lists what your landlord has already been paid.
What is COVID-19 rental debt?
COVID-19 rental debt is rent and other payments required under the rental agreement, like utilities or parking fees, that came due between March 1, 2020 and September 30, 2021.
What you can do
Agree with the other side
If you can work with your landlord (and there is no restraining order involved), you may be able to agree on your own without going to court.
Go to your court date
If you disagree with all or some of what your landlord is saying or you have some other defense, you can go to the court date and give your side of the story. For example, you can explain if the amount your landlord is asking for is wrong. There isn't a form to file to respond. You can just show up on the court date. You can ask a lawyer for advice before your court date, but you can't have a lawyer in court (nor can your landlord).
Sue the other side back and go to the court date
If you think your landlord owes you money (for example, they owe you money from your security deposit), you can fill out, file, and serve a Defendant’s Claim and ORDER to Go to Small Claims Court (form SC-120). Then you can go to the court date and give your side of the story. If you can’t afford the filing fee, you can ask for a fee waiver.
Choose not to show up in court
If you were given the forms (served) correctly and don’t go to the court date, the judge will decide without your input. You'll probably lose the case and owe your landlord money.
Consider getting help.
This website has information to walk you through the basic process, but you may need more help. If so, you can start with the Small Claims Advisor, a free program. A Small Claims Advisor can explain other options, like what to do if you think you weren't served properly or your landlord is suing you in the wrong county.
Explore your options
What's next?
Once you decide if and how you’re going to react to the other side’s papers, go to the step-by-step instructions.
Keep in mind that you may have to do something quickly. If you’re going to file a Defendant’s Claim, there's a deadline you'll need to meet.
Reach an agreement
Learn how to write up an agreement and cancel the court date
Get ready for your court date (trial)
Get information about how to get ready for your court date
Sue the other side back
Get more information about filing a Defendant's Claim and deadlines
