Index: All Pages
Fee waivers in guardianships and conservatorships
When you file papers to start a guardianship or conservatorship case, you pay a filing fee. There are also fees for an investigation and certified copies of court forms. There may be other fees later in your case.
You can ask the court for a “fee waiver” so you do not pay these fees. When you ask for the fee waiver, the court will look at the income and ability to pay of the child (in a guardianship) or the proposed conservatee (in a conservatorship). If the court gives you a fee waiver, you do not have to pay the filing fee, costs of the investigation, and other fees.
Enter your email
We&#39;ll only use this email to send this link
When to ask for a fee waiver
Typically, you ask for a fee waiver when you file papers to start a guardianship or conservatorship case and have to pay your first filing fee. There is no fee if you are the child's or conservatee's parent filing papers to say you disagree with (oppose) the guardianship or conservatorship, or if you're doing so on behalf of the proposed ward (the child) or proposed conservatee. There may be other fees for other filings or for relatives who want to oppose the request.
We show approximate filing fees on this site. You can find exact fees on each county court's website or on the Statewide Court Fee Schedule.
Guardians or conservators: You can ask for a fee waiver if you're asking the court to appoint a guardian or a conservator for a child or an adult. You can also ask for a fee waiver if you're already the guardian or conservator and the child or conservatee can't afford fees later in the case. The fee waiver in these situations are based on the child's or the ward's income, not yours.  Fee waivers expire 60 days after the case is finished (judgment entered, dismissal, or final decision by the judge).  They can also end if the court finds the child or conservatee no longer qualifies for the fee waiver.
Parent or other relative: Keep in mind that if you're a parent or other relative filing papers in a guardianship or conservatorship case and you can't afford to pay the filing fees, the judge will decide whether to wave your filing fees based on your income. You will also need to ask the court for a fee waiver on different forms because you're a parent or relative in a guardianship or conservatorship case. Click here to to ask the court for a fee waiver if you're a parent or other relative filing papers in a guardianship or conservatorship case.
If you're the petitioner in a guardianship or conservatorship case, you qualify for a fee waiver if the child or conservatee:
Receives public benefits.
For example, if they receive unemployment, Medi-Cal, Food Stamps (Cal Fresh/SNAP), WIC, Cal-WORKS, General Assistance, SSI, SSP, Tribal TANF, IHSS, or CAPI. You also qualify if the child's parent or conservatee's spouse receives one of these benefits. You will need to list which benefit they receive and who receives the benefit to qualify.
Has a household income, before taxes, below a set amount.
The set amount is listed on Form FW-001-GC in item 8b. The amount depends on the number of people in the household. You will need to give the court information about household size and income. Do not include any proposed guardian or conservator in the household size and do not count their income (unless they are the spouse of the proposed conservatee).
Can't meet their household's basic needs and pay the filing fees.
You will need to give the court information about their income and expenses to qualify this way. Do not include the income and expenses of the proposed guardian or conservator (unless they are the spouse of the proposed conservatee).
How to ask for a fee waiver
Gather the information you need
You may need information about the child's or conservatee's income and expenses to fill out the fee waiver form.
If they receive public benefits, you only need to check which benefit they receive on the form. You don't need to fill out the part about their income or expenses.
If their household income is below a set amount, you will need to fill out information about their household income. You might need to look at copies of paystubs or other documents with their income, to fill out the forms.
If they can't afford the fee and their household's basic needs, you will need to fill out information about their income and expenses. You might need to look at things like paystubs, bills, and bank statements, to fill out the forms.
Fill out forms
Fill out the Request to Waive Court Fees (Ward or Conservatee) (form FW-001-GC). This is a confidential form that only the court will see.
On item 8, check a, b, or c depending on why they qualify.
If you checked a (they qualify because they receive public benefits), you do not need to complete Page 4.
If you checked b (they qualify because of their household income), you must answer the items on Page 4 about their household income (items 14, 15, and 16).
If you checked c (they qualify because they can't afford the fee), you must fill out all of Page 4.
Sign your request for a fee waiver under penalty of perjury. This means you promise the court that you are telling the truth and that you understand you can be punished for lying.
Also, fill out items 1 and 3 on Form FW-003-GC, Order on Court Fee Waiver (Ward or Conservatee).
Make copies
Make a copy of your completed Form FW-001-GC.  You'll have 2 total, including the original. You don't need to copy Form FW-003-GC.
File your Request for Fee Waiver
Take your original and copy of your fee waiver forms to the court clerk. You can do this at the same time you file your other court papers.
The clerk will tell you how long it will take to process your request for fee waiver. The clerk or judge will use the Form FW-003-GC to write their decision.
Can I file my forms by mail? Or online?
Yes, you can file by mail. Mail the originals and to the clerk. You need to include a self-addressed stamped envelope so the clerk can mail your copies back to you. Make sure to include enough postage. If you do not include a self-addressed stamped envelope, you will have to go to the courthouse to pick up your copies. Some courts allow online filing (called e-filing). You can find out if your court has online filing by visiting your court’s website.
After you ask for the fee waiver
If the court granted your request
Your court papers are now fully filed. Your next step will likely be to serve the papers.
Go back to your steps
Return to the step by step instructions for your case
Go back to Home
Start again at the Self Help Guide to the California Courts
If the court didn't grant your request
Depending on why the request was denied, you may still have options to show the court more information if you act quickly. You can also decide to pay the fees yourself.
If the fee waiver wasn't granted
Find out how to read the court order, what to do next, and what happens if you pay the fees yourself.
Next Steps
Fee waivers in civil appeals
In most civil cases, you have to pay a fee to file a notice of appeal or other paper that starts the proceeding. If you are a respondent in a proceeding in the Court of Appeal or Supreme Court, in most cases, you will have to pay a fee when you file your first paper in that court. You may also have to pay other court fees in these proceedings, such as fees to prepare or get a copy of a clerk's transcript or for the court to hold a deposit for a court reporter’s transcript. If you can't afford the filing fee or other court costs, you may qualify to have these fees and costs waived by the court.
Who qualifies for a fee waiver
You qualify for a fee waiver if:
You receive public benefits
For example, you qualify if you receive Medi-Cal, Food Stamps (Cal Fresh), Cal-Works, General Assistance, SSI, SSP Tribal TANF, IHHS, CAPI, WIC, or unemployment benefits. You will need to list which benefit you receive to qualify this way.
Your household income, before taxes, is below a set amount
The set amount is listed on Request to Waiver Court Fees (form FW-001) in item 5b. You will need to give the court information about your household income to qualify this way.
You can't meet your household's basic needs and pay the filing fees
You will need to give the court information about your income and expenses to qualify this way.
You must sign your request for a fee waiver under penalty of perjury. You must tell the truth, and your answers must be accurate and complete.
How to ask for a fee waiver
You will need to fill out and file Request to Waive Court Fees (form FW-001). To learn more about appellate court fee waivers, read Information Sheet on Waiver of Appellate Court Fees-Supreme Court, Court of Appeal, Appellate Division (form APP-015/FW-015-INFO). To learn more about trial court fee waivers, read Information Sheet on Waiver of Superior Court Fees and Costs (form FW-001-INFO). The California laws about fee waivers are in California Government Code sections 68630 through 68641.
Choose the option that best fits your situation:
An appeal in a limited civil case
If the superior court already granted you a fee waiver and it has not ended yet (fee waivers automatically end 60 days after the judgment), your fees are waived. Just give the appellate division a copy of your fee waiver order.
If you did not have a fee waiver in the trial court, if the fee waiver already ended, or if you want to request that the court waive other fees not included in your current fee waiver, such as the fee for holding a deposit for a court reporter’s transcript, fill out Request to Waive Court Fees (form FW-001) and check both boxes in item 4. Use the Instructions for FW-001 as a guide.
If you are the appellant (the party appealing), file Request to Waive Court (form FW-001) with your Notice of Appeal. If you have an existing fee waiver, file form FW-001 when that fee waiver ends.
If you haven’t already requested a fee waiver when the fee is due for a copy of the clerk’s transcript or for holding a deposit for a reporter’s transcript, file form-FW-001 with your request for a copy of the clerk’s transcript or the reporter's transcript.
If you haven’t already requested a fee waiver and want the fees waived for attending oral argument remotely, file form FW-001 when the fee is due.
An appeal in an unlimited civil case
If you are the appellant (the party appealing), fill out Request to Waive Court Fees (form FW-001), reading the form very carefully. Use the Instructions for FW-001 as a guide. Turn in Form FW-001 with your Notice of Appeal.
If you are the respondent (a party other than the appellant) and:
You got a fee waiver from the trial court that has not ended yet, your court costs are already waived. Just give the appellate court a copy of your fee waiver order.
You did not have a fee waiver, it ended, or if you want to request that the court waive other fees, such as the fee for holding a deposit for a court reporter’s transcript, fill out Request to Waive Court Fees (form FW-001), reading the form very carefully and using the Instructions for FW-001 as a guide. Turn in Form FW-001 in the trial court with your request for a copy of the reporter's transcript or the clerk's transcript.
If you want to waive the fees for attending oral argument remotely, turn in Form FW-001 to the Court of Appeal when the fee for this remote appearance is due.
Petition for a writ
Fill out Request to Waive Court Fees (form FW-001). You can use the Instructions for FW-001 as a guide.
File Form FW-001 with your petition for a writ.
A party other than the petitioner should file Request to Waive Court Fees (form FW-001) at the time court fees are due.
Petition for review in the Supreme Court in civil cases (including family law)
File Form FW-001 with your petition for review in the Supreme Court.
A party other than the petitioner should file form FW-001 when their first document is filed with the Supreme Court.
If your fee waiver is granted
The appellate and trial courts will waive fees
The appellate court will waive:
The appellate or petitioner's filing fee for a notice of appeal, petition for a writ, or petition for review
The filing fee for the first document filed in the appellate court by a party other than the party who filed the notice of appeal or petition
Any court fee for having your oral argument by telephone
The trial court will waive:
The appellant's cost for preparing, copying, and certifying the clerk's transcript, sending the original to the appellate court and a copy to you, and processing the deposit required under California Government Code section 68926.1
The fee for the court to hold in trust the deposit for the court reporter’s transcript
The respondent's cost for a copy of the clerk's transcript
Any fees for making a transcript or copy of an official electronic recording under California Rule of Court 8.835
When it grants a fee waiver, the trial court also may, but is not required to, waive other necessary court fees or expenses upon request.
Reporter's transcript fees are not waived
Even if you qualify for a fee waiver, the court can't waive the fees for preparing a reporter's transcript in a civil case because this is a fee charged by the reporter, not the court. There is a special fund called the "Transcript Reimbursement Fund" that may help you pay for your transcript. If you can't pay for a reporter's transcript, you can prepare a record of the oral proceedings in other ways.
Let the court know if your financial situation changes
If your finances improve or you can now afford to pay the court fees and costs, you have to tell the court within 5 days. Fill out a Notice to Court of Improved Financial Situation or Settlement (form FW-010) and file it with the clerk of the court handling your case.
Also, you may get a Notice to Appear for Reconsideration of Fee Waiver (form FW-011). This is a notice from the court to go to a hearing to reconsider your fee waiver. The court sends this notice if it thinks your financial situation may have changed or you are abusing the fee waiver. Make sure you go to this court date, or your fee waiver may be canceled and you may have to repay fees that were waived.
Fee waivers expire 60 days after the judgment or dismissal or after the case is finished in some other way. Waivers can also end if the court finds that you are no longer eligible for one.
You may have to pay back the fees later.
Even if your fees are waived, you may have to pay them back later if your financial situation changes during the case or you settle with the other side for more than $10,000. Find out more in Information Sheet on Waiver of Appellate Court Fees-Supreme Court, Court of Appeal, Appellate Division (form FW-015-INFO).
If your fee waiver request is denied
Your fee waiver application may be denied for 1 of 3 reasons:
It is incomplete
From your application, the court decided you are not eligible for the fee waiver
The court has a substantial question about whether you are eligible for the fee waiver
The judge will indicate the reason for denying your request on the court’s fee waiver order.
If your fee waiver is denied, you have 10 days from the date the order is mailed or personally delivered to you to either:
Pay your fees
Do what the court ordered in the fee waiver order, like filing a new fee waiver request or providing additional information requested by the court.
If you do not do 1 of these 2 things within the 10 days and you are the appellant, your appeal may be dismissed.
If the court denies your fee waiver but sets a hearing
If the court wants more information to make a decision on your fee waiver, the court may set up a hearing date for you. The information about the hearing (like the date, time, and location) will be on the fee waiver order.
Make sure you go to that hearing. Bring with you any documents that the court tells you to bring. The court will tell you what documents it wants you to bring on the fee waiver order.
If you do not go to this court hearing, your fee waiver application will be denied and you will have to pay your fees in 10 days.
